Go to him, Dolabella; bid himyield.
Being so frustrate,
tell him he mocks the pausesthat he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Wherefore is that?
And what art thou that darestappear thus to us?
I am called Dercetas.
Mark Antony I served,
who best was worthy, best to beserved.
Whilst he stood up and spoke, hewas my master.
And I wore my life to spend uponhis haters.
If thou please to take me tothee,
as I was to him I'll be toCaesar.
If thou pleasest not, I yieldthee up my life.
What is it thou say'st?
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thingshould make a greater crack.
The round world should haveshook lions into civil streets
and citizens to their dens.
The death of Antony is not asingle doom.
In the name lay a moiety of theworld.
He is dead, Caesar.
Not by a public minister ofjustice
nor by a hired knife
but that self hand,
which writ his honor in the actsit did,
hath, with the courage which theheart did lend it,
splitted the heart.
This is his sword; I robbed hiswound of it.
Behold it stained with his mostnoble blood.
Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me,
but it is tidings to wash theeyes of kings.
And strange it is that naturemust compel us
to lament our most persisteddeeds.
His taints and honors wagedequal with him.
A rarer spirit never did steerhumanity.
But you, gods, will give us somefaults to make us men.
Caesar is touched.
When such a spacious mirror'sset before him,
he needs must see himself.
O Antony!
I have followed thee to this.
But we do lance diseases in ourbodies.
I must perforce have shown tothee such a declining day
or looked on thine.
We could not stall together inthe whole world,
but yet let me lament
with tears as sovereign as theblood of hearts
that thou, my brother,
my competitor in top of alldesign,
my mate in empire,
friend and companion in thefront of war,
the arm of mine own body
and the heart where mine histhoughts did kindle.
That our stars, unreconcilable,
should divide our equalness tothis.
Hear me, good friends.
But I will tell you at somemeeter season.
The business of this man looksout of him.
We'll hear him what he says.
Whence are you?
A poor Egyptian yet.
The queen, my mistress,
confined in all she has, hermonument,
of thy intents desiresinstruction
that she preparedly may frameherself
to the way she's forced to.
Bid her have good heart.
She soon shall know of us, bysome of ours,
wow honorable and how kindly wedetermine for her.
For Caesar cannot learn to beungentle.
So the gods preserve thee!
Come hither, Proculeius.
Go and say, we purpose her noshame.
Give her what comforts
the quality of her passion shallrequire.
Lest, in her greatness,
by some mortal stroke she dodefeat us.
For her life in Rome would beeternal in our triumph.
Go, and with your speediestbring us what she saysó
How you find of her.
Caesar, I shall.
Where's Dolabella to secondProculeius?
Dolabella!
Let him alone, for I remembernow how he's employed.
He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent
where you shall see how hardly Iwas drawn into this war,
how calm and gentle I proceededstill in all my writings.
Go with me and see what I canshow in this.
My desolation does begin to makea better life.
'Tis paltry to be Caesar.
Not being Fortune, he's butFortune's knave,
a minister of her will.
And it is great to do that thingthat ends all other deeds
which shackles accidents andbolts up change,
which sleeps and never palatesmore the dug.
The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.
Caesar sends greeting to theQueen of Egypt
and bids thee study on what fairdemands
thou means to have him grantthee.
What's thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Antony did tell me of you;
bade me trust you.
But I do not greatly care to bedeceived
that have no use for trusting.
If your master would have aqueen his beggar,
you must tell him
that majesty, to keep decorum,must no less beg than a kingdom.
If he please to give meconquered Egypt for my son,
he gives me so much of mine own
as I will kneel to him withthanks.
Be of good cheer.
You're fallen into a princelyhand.
Fear nothing.
Make your full reference freelyto my lord,
who is so full of grace that itflows over on all that need.
Let me report to him your sweetdependency,
and you shall find a conqueror
that will pray in aid forkindness,
where he for grace is kneeledto.
Pray you, tell him I am hisfortune's vassal,
and I send him the greatness hehas got.
I hourly learn a doctrine ofobedience
and would gladly look him im theface.
This I'll report, dear lady.
Have comfort,
for I know your plight is pitiedof him that caused it.
O Cleopatra!
Thou art taken, queen!
Quick, quick, good hands.
Hold, worthy lady, hold.
Do not yourself such wrong,
who are in this relieved but notbetrayed.
What of death, too, that ridsour dogs of languish?
Cleopatra!
Do not abuse my master's bountyby the undoing of yourself.
Let the world see his noblenesswell acted,
which your death will never letcome forth.
Where art thou, death?
Come hither, come!
Come, come, and take a queenworth many babes and beggars!
O, temperance, lady!
Sir, I will eat no meat.
I'll not drink, sir.
If idle talk will once benecessary,
I'll not sleep neither.
This mortal house I'll ruin!
Do Caesar what he can.
Know, sir,
that I will not wait pinioned atyour master's court
nor once be chastised with thesober eye of dull Octavia.
Shall they hoist me up
and show me to the shoutingvarletry of censuring Rome?
Rather a ditch in Egypt begentle grave unto me!
Rather on Nilus' mud lay mestark naked
and let the water flies blow meinto abhorring!
Rather make my country's highpyramides my gibbet
and hang me up in chains!
You do extend these thoughts ofhorror
further than you shall findcause in Caesar.
Proculeius,
what thou hast done thy masterCaesar knows,
and he hath sent for thee.
For the queen, I'll take her tomy guard.
So, Dolabella.
It shall content me best; begentle to her.
To Caesar I will speak what youshall please,
if you'll employ me to him.
Say, I would die.
Most noble empress, you haveheard of me?
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter, sir, what I haveheard or known,
you laugh when boys or womentell their dreams.
Is it not your trick?
I understand not, madam.
I dreamt there was an EmperorAntony.
O, such another sleep,
that I might see but suchanother man!
If it might please yeó
His face was as the heavens
and therein stuck a sun andmoon,
which kept their course
and lighted the little O of theearth.
Most sovereign creatureó
His legs bestrid the ocean.
His reared arm crested theworld.
His voice was propertied as allthe tuned spheres,
and that to friends.
But when he meant to quail andshake the orb,
he was as rattling thunder.
For his bounty, there was nowinter in it.
An autumn 'twas that grew themore by reaping.
His delights were dolphin-like.
They showed his back above theelement they lived in.
In his livery walked crowns andcrownets.
Realms and islands were asplates dropped from his pocket.
Cleopatra!
Think you there was or might besuch a man
as this I dreamt of?
Gentle madam, no.
You lie up to the hearing of thegods.
But if there be or ever were onesuch,
it's past the size of dreaming.
Nature wants stuff to viestrange forms with fancy,
yet to imagine an Antony werenature's piece against fancy,
condemning shadows quite.
Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself great.
And you bear it as answering tothe weight.
Would I might never o'ertakepursued success,
but I do feel by the rebound ofyours
a grief that smites my veryheart at root.
I thank you, sir,
Know you what Caesar means to dowith me?
I am loath to tell you what Iwould you knew.
Nay, pray you, siró
Though he be honorableó
He'll lead me then in triumph?
Madam, he will; I know it.
Arise, you shall not kneel.
I pray you, rise.
Rise, Egypt.
Sir, the gods will have it thus.
My master and my lord I mustobey.
Take to you no hard thoughts.
The record of what injuries youdid us,
though written in our flesh,
we shall remember as things butdone by chance.
Sole sir of the world,
I cannot project mine own causeso well to make it clear,
but do confess I have been ladenwith like frailties
which before have often shamedour sex.
Cleopatra, know we willextenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to ourintents,
which towards you are mostgentle,
you shall find a benefit in thischange.
But if you seek to lay on me acruelty,
by taking Antony's course,
you shall bereave yourself of mygood purposes
and put your children to thatdestruction
which I'll guard them from ifthereon you rely.
I'll take my leave.
And may, through all the world;'tis yours.
And we, your scutcheons and yoursigns of conquest,
shall hang in what place youplease.
Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all forCleopatra.
This is the brief of money,plate, and jewels,
I am possessed of.
'Tis exactly valued, not pettythings admitted.
Still be it yours.
Bestow it at your pleasure.
And believe Caesar's no merchant
to make prize with you of thingsthat merchants sold.
Therefore, be cheered.
Make not your thoughts yourprisons.
No, dear queen.
For we intend so to dispose you
as yourself shall give uscounsel.
Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so muchupon you
that we remain your friend.
And so adieu.
My master and my lord.
Not so. Adieu.
He words me, girls; he words me.
That I should not be noble tomyself.
But, hark thee, Charmian.
Finish, good lady.
The bright day is done, and weare for the dark.
Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it isprovided.
Go put it to the haste.
Madam, I will.
Where is the queen?
Behold, sir.
Dolabella!
Madam, as thereto sworn by yourcommand,
which my love makes religion toobey,
I tell you this:
Caesar through Syria intends hisjourney.
And within three days,
you with your children will hesend before.
Make your best use of this.
I have performed your pleasureand my promise.
Dolabella, I shall remain yourdebtor.
I, your servant.
Adieu, good queen.
I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell and thanks.
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou, an Egyptian puppet,
shall be shown in Rome as wellas Ió
mechanic slaves with greasyaprons,
rules and hammers shall upliftus to the view.
In their thick breaths,.rank ofgross diet
shall be enclouded and forced todrink their vapour.
O the good gods.
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras.
Saucy lictors will catch at uslike strumpets
and scald rhymers ballad us outof tune.
The quick comedians extemporallywill stage us
and present our Alexandrianrevels.
Antony shall be brought drunkenforth,
and I shall see some squeakingCleopatra boy my greatness
in the posture of a whore.
O the good gods!
Nay, that's certain.
I'll never see it.
For I am sure my nails arestronger than mine eyes.
Why, that's the way to fooltheir preparation
and to conquer their most absurdintents.
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen.
Go fetch my best attires.
I am again for Cydnus to meetMark Antony.
Sirrah Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, we'lldispatch indeed.
And when thou hast done thischare,
I'll give thee leave to playtill doomsday.
Bring our crown and all.
Wherefore's this noise?
Here is a rural fellow
that will not be denied yourhighness presence.
He brings you figs.
Let him come in.
What poor an instrument may do anoble deed.
He brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed,
and I have nothing of woman inme now.
From head to foot I ammarble-constant.
Now the fleeting moon; no planetis of mine.
This is the man.
Avoid and leave him.
Hast thou the pretty worm ofNilus there
that kills and pains not?
Truly, I have him,
but I would not be the party
that should desire you to touchhim,
for his biting is immortal.
Those that do die of it doseldom or never recover.
Rememberest thou any that havedied on it?
Very manyó men and women too.
I heard of one of them onlyyesterday.
A very honest woman, butsomething given to lie
as a woman should not do but inthe way of honesty.
How she died of the biting ofit,
what pain she felt,
truly, she made very good reportof the worm.
But this is most fallible.
The worm's an odd worm.
Get thee hence; farewell.
I wish you joy of the worm.
Farewell.
You must think this, look you,
that the worm will do his kind.
Ay, ay; farewell.
Look you, the worm is not to betrusted
but in the keeping of wisepeople,
for, indeed, there is nogoodness in the worm.
Take thou no care; it shall beheeded.
Very good.
Give it nothing, I pray you,
for it's not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
You must not think I am sosimple,
but I know the devil himselfwill not eat a woman.
I know that a woman is a dishfor the gods
if the devil dresses her not.
But, truly, these same whoresondevils
do the gods great harm in theirwomen,
for in every ten that they make,the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone; farewell.
Yes, forsooth.
I wish you joy of the worm.
Give me my robe.
Put on my crown.
I have immortal longings in me.
Now no more the juice of Egypt'sgrape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras.
Quick.
Methinks I hear Antony call.
I see him rouse himself topraise my noble act.
I hear him mock the luck ofCaesar,
which the gods give men toexcuse their after wrath.
Husband, I come.
Now to that name my courageprove my title.
I am fire and air.
My other elements I give tobaser life.
So; have you done?
Come then and take the lastwarmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian.
Iras, long farewell.
Have I the aspic in my lips?
Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gentlypart,
the stroke of death is as alover's pinch,
which hurts and is desired.
Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest,
thou tell'st the world it is notworth leave-taking.
Dissolve thick cloud and rain,
that I may say the godsthemselves do weep.
This proves me base.
If she first meet the curledAntony,
he'll make demand of her andspend that kiss
which is my heaven to have.
Come, thou mortal wretch.
With thy sharp teeth
this knot intrinsicate of lifeat once untie.
Poor venomous fool, be angry anddispatch.
Peace, peace.
Dost thou not see my baby at mybreast
that sucks the nurse asleep?
O, break!
As sweet as balm,
as soft as air,
as gentleó
O Antony!
Nay, I will take thee too.
What should I stayó
In this vile world?
So fare thee well.
Now boast thee, death,
in thy possession lies a lassunparalleled.
Downy windows close,
and golden Phoebus never bebeheld of eyes again so royal.
Your crown's awry.
I'll mend it and then play.
Where is the queen?
Speak softly, wake her not.
Caesar hath sentó
Too slow a messenger.
O, come apace, dispatch!
I partly feel thee.
What work is here?
Charmian, is this well done?
It is well done and fitting fora princess
descended of so many royalkings.
How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts touch theireffects in this.
Thyself art coming to seeperformed the dreaded act
which thou so sought'st tohinder.
O sir, you are too sure anaugurer.
That you did fear is done.
Bravest at the last, she leveledat our purposes,
and, being royal, took her ownway.
The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple countryman that broughther figs.
This was his basket.
If she had swallowed poison,
'twould appear by externalswelling,
but she looks like sleep
as she would catch anotherAntony
in her strong toil of grace.
Here, on her breast.
There is a vent of blood andsomething blown.
The like is on her arm.
This is an aspic's trail,
and these fig leaves have slimeupon them,
such as the aspic leaves uponthe caves of Nile.
Most probable that so she died.
For her physician tells me
she hath pursued conclusionsinfinite of easy ways to die.
Take up her bed
and bear her women from themonument.
She shall be buried by herAntony.
No grave upon the earth shallclip in it a pair so famous.
High events as these strikethose that make them,
and their story is no less inpity than his glory
which brought them to belamented.
Our army shall in solemn showattend this funeral
and then to Rome.
Come, Dolabella,
see high order in this greatsolemnity.